README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/lukasjarosch/skipper">
    <img src="./assets/logo.png" alt="Logo" width="128" height="128">
  </a>

<h1 align="center">Skipper</h3>
<p>Inventory based templated configuration library based on the kapitan project</p>
</br>
</div>

# What is skipper?

Skipper is heavily inspired by the awesome [Kapitan](https://kapitan.dev/) project. The major difference
is that skipper is primarily meant to be used as library. This allows you for example to have way more
control over the data-structures used inside the templates. 

Skipper is not meant to be a *one-size-fits-all* solution. The goal of Skipper is to enable
companies to create the own - custom built - template and inventory engine, without having to do the heavy lifing.


## Roadmap

- [x] Allow self referencing within classes
  - When writing classes one will very likely need to reference a valuie of the same class somewhere else. 
    Think about defining a docker image once and reusing it throughout the class, but with different tags.
  - Enable the notation `${object:key}` within classes and targets
- [x] Introduce a default set of `${variable}` variables to be used within targets and classes
  - First candidade is to have `${target_name}` accessible everywhere
- [ ] Allow definition of custom variables within classes
- [ ] Enable variable usage across classes
  - This will introduce definition checks. If a class is not used by a target, but referenced by a variable, it is not defined
- [x] Allow wildcard imports of classes `foo.bar.*`
  - This might be useful if you want to define a directory with classes which are validated by your business-logic.
  - You might want to define some sort of `GeneralizedResource` which you want customers to use.
    - In order to maintain validity of your templates, you will need to enforce a specified struct of the class
    - And you might want to import all defined classes inside that folder, without knowing in advance which classes it contains.
- [ ] Class inheritance. Currently only targets can `use` classes but it would be nice if classes could also use different classes
  - This would introduce a higher level of inheritance which users can set-up for their inventory.
- [x] `<no value>` detection in rendered templates
  - If for some reason a template uses a value which is not set, the user should have the ability to detect that post generation.
  - Introduce a verify mechanism which ideally checks for missing values and maybe also extracts which template-key it originated from
  - This can be evaluated before the template files are written to disk
  - We can have a strict mode which fails on these errors, or not
- [x] Add the option to inject arbitrary maps into the inventory with custom keys (`inventory.AddKey(key string, data Data)`)
  - This is very useful if you have a different data-structure which you want to add
  - For example if your app has a model which can be written via an HTTP API, you might want to be able to use these data as well


# Documentation
> This documentation is work in progress and will be moved to it's own place in the future. 

## Classes
A class is a yaml file which defines arbitrary information about your project.

There is only one rule for classes:
  - The filename of the class must be the root key of the yaml struct

This means that if your class is called `pizza.yaml`, the class must look like this:

```yaml
pizza:
  # any value
```

## Targets
A target usually is a speparate environment in your infrastructure or a single namespace in your Kubernetes cluster.
Targets `use` classes to pull in the required innventory data in order to produce the correct tree which is required in order to render the templates.

On any given run, Skipper only allows to set **one** target. This is to ensure that the generated map of data is consistent.

The way a target makes uses of the inventory is by using the `use` clause which tells Skipper which classes to include in the assembly of the target inventory.


### Naming

The name of the target is given by its filename. So if your target is called `development.yaml`, the target name will be `development`. 

The structure of a target file is pretty simple, there are only two rules:

- The top-level key of the target **must** be `target`
- There must be a key `target.use` which *has to be* an array and tells Skipper which classes this particular target requires.

Below you'll find the most basic example of a target.
The target does not define values itself, it just uses values from a class `project.common`.
The class must be located in the `classPath` passed into `Inventory.Load()`, where path separators are replaced by a dot.

So if your classPath is `./inventory/classes`, referencing `foo.bar` will make Skipper attempt to load `./inventory/classes/foo/bar.yaml`.

```yaml
target:
  use:
    project.common
```

## Variables
Variables in Skipper always have the same format: `${variable_name}` 

Skipper has *three* different types of variables.

1. [Dynamic Variables](#dynamic-variables)
2. [Predefined Variables](#predefined-variables)
3. [User-defined Variables](#user-defined-variables)

### Dynamic Variables

Dynamic variables are variables which use a *selector path* to point to existing values which are defined in your inventory.

Consider the following class **images.yaml**
```yaml
images:
  base_image: some/image

  production:
    image: ${images:base_image}:v1.0.0
  staging:
    image: ${images:base_image}:v2.0.0-rc1
  development:
    image: ${images:base_image}:latest
```

Once the class is processed, the class looks like this:
```yaml
images:
  base_image: some/image

  production:
    image: some/image:v1.0.0
  staging:
    image: some/image:v2.0.0-rc1
  development:
    image: some/image:latest
```

The name of the variable uses common *dot-notation*, except that we're using ':' instead of dots.
We chose to use colons because they are easier to read inside the curly braces.

### Predefined Variables

Predefined variables could also be considered constants - at least from a user perspective.
The predefined variables can easily be defined as `map[string]interface{}`, where the keys are
the variable names.

You have to pass your predefined variables to the `Inventory.Data()` call, then they are evaluated.
If you do not pass these variables, the function will return an error as it will attempt to treat them as dynamic variables.

Consider the following example (your main.go)
```go
// ...

predefinedVariables := map[string]interface{}{
    "target_name": "develop",
    "output_path": "foo/bar/baz",
    "company_name": "AcmeCorp"
}

data, err := inventory.Data(target, predefinedVariables)
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}

// ...
```

You will now be able to use the variables `${target_name}`, `${output_path}` and `${company_name}`
throughout your yaml files and have Skipper replace them dynamically once you call `Data()` on the inventory.

### User-defined Variables

**TODO**

### Acknowledgments
- Logo: <a href="https://www.flaticon.com/de/kostenlose-icons/kapitan" title="kapitän Icons">Skipper Logo designed by freepik - Flaticon</a>

Commit message:

docs: Add new todo for external classes

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/lukasjarosch/skipper">
    <img src="./assets/logo.png" alt="Logo" width="128" height="128">
  </a>

<h1 align="center">Skipper</h3>
<p>Inventory based templated configuration library based on the kapitan project</p>
</br>
</div>

# What is skipper?

Skipper is heavily inspired by the awesome [Kapitan](https://kapitan.dev/) project. The major difference
is that skipper is primarily meant to be used as library. This allows you for example to have way more
control over the data-structures used inside the templates. 

Skipper is not meant to be a *one-size-fits-all* solution. The goal of Skipper is to enable
companies to create the own - custom built - template and inventory engine, without having to do the heavy lifing.


## Roadmap

- [x] Allow self referencing within classes
  - When writing classes one will very likely need to reference a valuie of the same class somewhere else. 
    Think about defining a docker image once and reusing it throughout the class, but with different tags.
  - Enable the notation `${object:key}` within classes and targets
- [x] Introduce a default set of `${variable}` variables to be used within targets and classes
  - First candidade is to have `${target_name}` accessible everywhere
- [ ] Allow definition of custom variables within classes
- [ ] Enable variable usage across classes
  - This will introduce definition checks. If a class is not used by a target, but referenced by a variable, it is not defined
- [ ] Allow adding external data (`map[string]any`) as classes
  - Useful for data which is pre-processed somewhere else, outside of the skipper scope
  - Add function something like `AddClass(data map[string]any, classPath string, adjustRootKey bool) error`
    - data is the data to add as class, this will be written into the `classPath` as file - relative to the class path of skipper
    - `adjustRootKey` addresses the issue that if the data has been loaded in a struct, the root key might not match the filename and thus break skipper rules 
- [x] Allow wildcard imports of classes `foo.bar.*`
  - This might be useful if you want to define a directory with classes which are validated by your business-logic.
  - You might want to define some sort of `GeneralizedResource` which you want customers to use.
    - In order to maintain validity of your templates, you will need to enforce a specified struct of the class
    - And you might want to import all defined classes inside that folder, without knowing in advance which classes it contains.
- [ ] Class inheritance. Currently only targets can `use` classes but it would be nice if classes could also use different classes
  - This would introduce a higher level of inheritance which users can set-up for their inventory.
- [x] `<no value>` detection in rendered templates
  - If for some reason a template uses a value which is not set, the user should have the ability to detect that post generation.
  - Introduce a verify mechanism which ideally checks for missing values and maybe also extracts which template-key it originated from
  - This can be evaluated before the template files are written to disk
  - We can have a strict mode which fails on these errors, or not
- [x] Add the option to inject arbitrary maps into the inventory with custom keys (`inventory.AddKey(key string, data Data)`)
  - This is very useful if you have a different data-structure which you want to add
  - For example if your app has a model which can be written via an HTTP API, you might want to be able to use these data as well


# Documentation
> This documentation is work in progress and will be moved to it's own place in the future. 

## Classes
A class is a yaml file which defines arbitrary information about your project.

There is only one rule for classes:
  - The filename of the class must be the root key of the yaml struct

This means that if your class is called `pizza.yaml`, the class must look like this:

```yaml
pizza:
  # any value
```

## Targets
A target usually is a speparate environment in your infrastructure or a single namespace in your Kubernetes cluster.
Targets `use` classes to pull in the required innventory data in order to produce the correct tree which is required in order to render the templates.

On any given run, Skipper only allows to set **one** target. This is to ensure that the generated map of data is consistent.

The way a target makes uses of the inventory is by using the `use` clause which tells Skipper which classes to include in the assembly of the target inventory.


### Naming

The name of the target is given by its filename. So if your target is called `development.yaml`, the target name will be `development`. 

The structure of a target file is pretty simple, there are only two rules:

- The top-level key of the target **must** be `target`
- There must be a key `target.use` which *has to be* an array and tells Skipper which classes this particular target requires.

Below you'll find the most basic example of a target.
The target does not define values itself, it just uses values from a class `project.common`.
The class must be located in the `classPath` passed into `Inventory.Load()`, where path separators are replaced by a dot.

So if your classPath is `./inventory/classes`, referencing `foo.bar` will make Skipper attempt to load `./inventory/classes/foo/bar.yaml`.

```yaml
target:
  use:
    project.common
```

## Variables
Variables in Skipper always have the same format: `${variable_name}` 

Skipper has *three* different types of variables.

1. [Dynamic Variables](#dynamic-variables)
2. [Predefined Variables](#predefined-variables)
3. [User-defined Variables](#user-defined-variables)

### Dynamic Variables

Dynamic variables are variables which use a *selector path* to point to existing values which are defined in your inventory.

Consider the following class **images.yaml**
```yaml
images:
  base_image: some/image

  production:
    image: ${images:base_image}:v1.0.0
  staging:
    image: ${images:base_image}:v2.0.0-rc1
  development:
    image: ${images:base_image}:latest
```

Once the class is processed, the class looks like this:
```yaml
images:
  base_image: some/image

  production:
    image: some/image:v1.0.0
  staging:
    image: some/image:v2.0.0-rc1
  development:
    image: some/image:latest
```

The name of the variable uses common *dot-notation*, except that we're using ':' instead of dots.
We chose to use colons because they are easier to read inside the curly braces.

### Predefined Variables

Predefined variables could also be considered constants - at least from a user perspective.
The predefined variables can easily be defined as `map[string]interface{}`, where the keys are
the variable names.

You have to pass your predefined variables to the `Inventory.Data()` call, then they are evaluated.
If you do not pass these variables, the function will return an error as it will attempt to treat them as dynamic variables.

Consider the following example (your main.go)
```go
// ...

predefinedVariables := map[string]interface{}{
    "target_name": "develop",
    "output_path": "foo/bar/baz",
    "company_name": "AcmeCorp"
}

data, err := inventory.Data(target, predefinedVariables)
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}

// ...
```

You will now be able to use the variables `${target_name}`, `${output_path}` and `${company_name}`
throughout your yaml files and have Skipper replace them dynamically once you call `Data()` on the inventory.

### User-defined Variables

**TODO**

### Acknowledgments
- Logo: <a href="https://www.flaticon.com/de/kostenlose-icons/kapitan" title="kapitän Icons">Skipper Logo designed by freepik - Flaticon</a>
